inset-area: property and data type: anchor positioning #6 (#34462)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/inset-area_value/index.md

  [ left | center | right | span-left | span-right | x-start | x-end | span-x-start | span-x-end | x-self-start | x-self-end | span-x-self-start | span-x-self-end | span-all ]
||
  [ top | center | bottom | span-top | span-bottom | y-start | y-end | span-y-start | span-y-end | y-self-start | y-self-end | span-y-self-start | span-y-self-end | span-all ]
|
  [ block-start | center | block-end | span-block-start | span-block-end | span-all ]
||
  [ inline-start | center | inline-end | span-inline-start | span-inline-end | span-all ]
|
  [ self-block-start | self-block-end | span-self-block-start | span-self-block-end | span-all ]
||
  [ self-inline-start | self-inline-end | span-self-inline-start | span-self-inline-end | span-all ]
|
  [ start | center | end | span-start | span-end | span-all ]{1,2}
|
  [ self-start | center | self-end | span-self-start | span-self-end | span-all ]{1,2}
]
```

## Description

The `<inset-area>` data type and `inset-area` property work on the concept of an **inset-area grid**, a 3x3 grid of tiles composed of four grid lines, two in each axis, with an anchor element being the center tile:

![The inset-area grid, as described below](inset-area.png)

> When used as the value of a positioned element`s inset-area` property, the dimensions of the center tile are defined by the [containing block](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Containing_block) of the element's default anchor element, while the dimensions of the grid's outer edge are defined by the positioned element's containing block. Logical keyterms are generally based on the writing mode and direction of containing block as well, except for the `self-*`, which are calculated from the writing mode of the anchor positioned element.

Author: I tried keeping the property out of this page as much as possible to conform to "data type" page styling, so kept the first phrase but committed the rest

```css
/* Examples: Two keywords to place the element in a single specific tile */
inset-area: top left;
inset-area: bottom right;
inset-area: start end;
inset-area: center end;
inset-area: block-start center;
inset-area: inline-start block-end;
inset-area: x-start y-end;
inset-area: center y-self-end;

/* Examples: Two keywords to span the element across two tiles */
inset-area: top span-left;
inset-area: span-bottom right;
inset-area: center span-start;
inset-area: inline-start span-block-end;
inset-area: y-start span-x-end;

/* Examples: Two keywords to span the element across three tiles */
inset-area: top span-all;
inset-area: block-end span-all;
inset-area: x-self-start span-all;

/* Examples: One keyword with an implicit second keyword  */
inset-area: top; /* equiv: top span-all */
inset-area: inline-start; /* equiv: inline-start span-all */
inset-area: center; /* equiv: center center */
inset-area: span-all; /* equiv: center center */
inset-area: start; /* equiv: start start */
inset-area: end; /* equiv: end end */
```

The different types of keywords that can be used include:

> - [Physical grid keywords](#physical-grid-keywords)

Reviewer: great! These work fine now.

- [Generic logical row and column keywords](#generic_logical_row_and_column_keywords)

> - [Explicity inline and block logical keywords](#explicit_inline_and_block_logical_keywords), and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Explicit inline and block logical keywords](#explicit_inline_and_block_logical_keywords)
```

Reviewer: @estelle oops, this one doesn't seem to have ended up in my review, for some reason. flagging in case you miss it.

- [Coordinate grid keywords](#coordinate-grid-keywords)

> **Note:** Generally, you can't mix different types in one value, e.g. physical and logical. To do so results in invalid values. For example, `inset-area: bottom inline-end` is not a valid value because it mixes physical and logical keywords.

> ### Physical grid keywords

Author: done

- `span-left`

  - : Span the center column and the left-hand column of the grid.

- `span-right`

  - : Span the center column and the right-hand column of the grid.

- `span-top`

  - : Span the center row and the top row of the grid.

- `span-bottom`

  - : Span the center row and the bottom row of the grid.

- `span-all`

  - : Valid with all the keyword types, spans the cell listed as well as the adjacent cells in the same row or column. See [`span-all`](#span-all) below.

For example, `top span-left` spans the top center and top left grid cells.

> **Note:** Trying to pair a row or column keyword with an inappropriate spanning keyword will result in an invalid value. For example, `right span-right` is invalid — you can't select the center right grid tile and then try to span further to the right.

### Physical grid keyword defaults

If only a single physical keyword is specified in the `inset-area` value, the other value is implied as follows:

- `left`, `right`, `top`, or `bottom`

>   - : The other value defaults to [`span-all`](#span-all), causing the element to span all three tiles of the grid or row it was initially placed in. For example, `left` is equivalent to `left span-all`.

Author: done

>   - : The other value defaults to [`span-all`](#span-all), causing the element to span all three tiles of the grid or row it was initially placed in. For example, `left` is equivalent to `left span-all`.

Reviewer: perfect, all fixed.

- `span-start`

  - : Span the center tile and the start tile of the grid row/column, with the direction refering to the writing mode of the element's containing block.

- `span-end`

  - : Span the center tile and the end tile of the grid row/column, with the direction refering to the writing mode of the element's containing block.

- `span-self-start`

  - : Span the center tile and the start tile of the grid row/column for the positioned elements writing mode.

- `span-self-end`

  - : Span the center tile and the end tile of the grid row/column, calculated from the element's own writing mode.

For example, `start span-end` and `self-start span-self-end` both cause the element to be placed in the center of the start block row, and then spanned across the tiles in that row that are also in the inline center and end columns. With `writing-mode: horizontal-tb` set, this would span the element over the top center and top right of the anchor, whereas with `writing-mode: vertical-rl` set it would span the element over the right center and bottom right.

> #### Inline and block logical keywords

Author: added explicit, did not add generic

- `x-self-end`

  - : The end tile along the grid's x-axis, calculated from the element's own writing mode.

- `center`

  - : The center of the grid's x-axis, calculated from the element's own writing mode.

The y-axis keywords include:

- `y-start`

  - : The start tile along the grid's y-axis, calculated from the containing block's writing mode.

- `y-end`

  - : The end tile along the grid's y-axis, calculated from the containing block's writing mode.

- `y-self-start`

  - : The start tile along the grid's y-axis, calculated from the element's own writing mode.

- `y-self-end`

  - : The end tile along the grid's y-axis, calculated from the element's own writing mode.

- `center`

  - : The center of the grid's y-axis, calculated from the element's own writing mode.

For example, `x-end y-start` and `x-self-end y-self-start` both select the grid cell at end of the x-axis and the start of the y-axis. With `writing-mode: horizontal-tb` set, this would be the cell to the top right of the anchor, whereas with `writing-mode: vertical-rl` is at the top left.

#### Spanning coordinate grid keywords

> You can specify one coordinate row or column keyword, and an appropriate coordinate spanning keyword. The element is initially placed in the center of the specified row or column, and it then spans in the direction specified in the spanning keyword, spanning two grid tiles:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The coordinate spanning keywords — when combined with acoordinate row or column keyword — specify a second grid tile for the inset area to expand into. When such a combination is set as an `inset-area` property value, a selected element is initially placed in the center of the specified row or column, and it then spans in the direction specified in the spanning keyword, spanning two grid tiles:
```

Author: went with 

> When combined with a coordinate row or column keyword, the coordinate-spanning keywords specify a second grid tile for the inset area to expand into. When such a combination is set as an `inset-area` property value, a selected element is initially placed in the center of the specified row or column, and it then spans in the direction specified in the spanning keyword, spanning two grid tiles:

Reviewer: great, WFM.
